Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that get their name
from the halo of spiked proteins on their outer surface,
which resemble a crown, the “corona”, under a microscope.
The new coronavirus is called SARS-CoV-2.
SARS-CoV-2 stands for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
As a new virus, it means that previously
no one in the world has been infected with it
and, therefore, no one has antibodies to it.
Because no one has antibodies,
everyone is at risk for catching the virus,
becoming ill, and spreading the virus.
With the discovery of SARS-CoV-2,
there are now seven types of coronaviruses known to affect humans.
Four regularly circulate in humans
and mostly cause mild to moderate upper-respiratory tract symptoms
that most people think of as the common cold.
SARS-CoV-2 causes a disease called COVID-19,
a severe respiratory illness.
COVID-19 can be deadly,
particularly for older people
and those with underlying health conditions.
The virus is spread through droplets in the air
after coughing or sneezing,
which people nearby can take in through their nose, mouth or eyes.
The virus can also spread by touching a contaminated surface,
but it’s unclear how long the virus lives on surfaces.
Once inside your body,
the virus travels quickly to the back of your nasal passages
and to the mucous membranes in the back of your throat.
The virus attaches to a receptor called
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, or ACE2,
on respiratory cells in your body.
The virus’s genetic material enters your cells.
The virus then “hijacks” your cells to produce
copies of itself which go on to infect more cells.
The time between the initial infection and the
first symptoms appearing varies widely but is five days on average.
Symptoms often start in the back of the throat,
with a dry cough and sore throat, along with a fever.
Symptoms become more severe as the infection starts
making its way to your lower respiratory tract.
Here, it can cause more respiratory problems
like bronchitis and pneumonia.
When the virus reaches your lungs,
it causes inflammation in the air sacs in your lungs,
which are called alveoli.
Your alveoli are where oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged.
In pneumonia there is swelling, decreased airflow,
and your alveoli start to fill with fluid,
causing shortness of breath and difficulty breathing.
Some people need a ventilator to help them breathe.
Less oxygen in your blood deprives other major organs
of oxygen including your liver, kidney and brain.
Acute respiratory distress,
caused by widespread swelling in the lungs,
stops your body from getting the oxygen it needs to survive.
This respiratory distress can lead to organ failure and death.
While COVID-19 can be deadly,
the vast majority, around 80 percent, of cases
are mild to moderate, and
people recover within a week or two.